Hello and welcome back.
My name is Vitalii And today we're going to talk about baselining and forecasting the exciting topic
which is a continuation of our discussion on the trends.
So baselining and forecasting who comes first I would like to clarify the definition and the subtle
difference that we have between baseline and forecasting baselining is usually referred to using the
past performance in order to understand derive the model so we can help inform the future.
In the management consulting baseline baseline is also used to determine something the behavior of the
system without any influence without any improvement.
So we can measure any improvements that we could do to the system from that baseline forecasting.
On the contrary is something that is looking into the future and something that determines the future
state of the system whether with influence or without So forecasting is a little bit more inclusive
term in this case and baselining is more simple and primitive.
And so I would like to cover baseline first because this will help you understand how forecasting is
made.
So let's do the baseline that lets outline the steps to do the baselining and then walk through a specific
example which will be quite interesting hopefully and quite exciting for you.
So step number one in in the baselining process is to plot your data and here specifically we're going
to cover the process for time series data set.
So the one that has as the argument and the independent argument as time and the way we want to plot
Aldora is that our next exercise days hours months.
So time related.
Step number two is to identify and remove outliers and noise if that is possible.
There are a few rules of thumb to follow here.
You don't want to massage your daughter too much.
So it becomes unrecognizable and not trustworthy anymore.
And the rule of thumb here is if you do more than five alterations to a data set it is likely to start
losing credibility if you apply like a dozen.
Then it's probably too much and the data is no longer representative.
But it depends a lot on the size of the data set.
We're talking about and and what not.
Step number three is to estimate the average and understand the variability.
And usually we play with standard deviation as the proxy for variability search for patterns is always
top number four.
And the example patterns are seasonality or cyclic behavior and step change step number 5 look for dependences
to enhance your model the dependencies or next level down in details behind your metric usually help
inform the underlying behaviors and underlying mechanisms of your indicator that you are trying to baseline.
So let's use an example from the previous lecture which is number of cars painted in April 2016 and
walk through these these steps quickly.
So to make sure that we are on the same page you put your dot up self-explanatory no comment on that.
I didn't find remove outliers and noise if possible.
And if you remember we're headed one outlier on the 18th of April where a fire alarm worked in the painting
workshop and therefore these dots that point is not representative of our normal performance.
And we had two days where in the painting workshop we had to redo repaint the cars and repainting usually
takes less time because we needed to repaint a very specific spot an area of the car and our system
data capturing system were not able to distinguish whether it was like full car painted from scratch
or it was a repainting therefore adding noise to our daughter and effectively not making those days
representative.
But we knew we had to know each and therefore we were able to remove it.
And as you can see I've color coded this with white collar.
So it is not and because that we want to exclude these data points.
Step number three is to estimate the average and understand the variability to estimate the average.
I just calculated the mean for the salad bars for the data points we are left with.
And in this particular case the number is.
Hundred and twenty five point eight.
From my memory the.
And you can see this line as a dark blue horizontal line.
The red lines are is our kind of like tunnel affordability and the way these these lines calculated
is we took the average and added a standard deviation and subtract and standard deviation one standard
deviation from those numbers and I used the Excel formula as t d s to calculate the standard deviation
for a sample set not for the full set for the full set.
I would have used STV P for the whole population.
So that's a subtle difference.
What we can see from this chart that the variability or volatility of that specific metric is not very
high.
And this is good.
It means that the model we're going to build would probably have more credibility and it will be easier
to build a model.
Step Number four is searching for patterns like seasonality step change.
And in this specific example there are no obvious patterns.
However not to be sneaky.
I actually included a few data sets that have some patterns for our practice.
So let's step to the side or step a little bit from our previous example and see how to recognize those
patterns.
So if our data set were to look like this you can see it on the left hand side.
This is likely a step change button in here.
And as you can see something happened on the 16th of April and the performance dropped.
Two hundred and one Korus per day painted versus Hammerton twenty five twenty six previously and other
pattern is called seasonality.
In this case you can see a cyclic behavior were during the summer in the northern hemisphere.
The number of course painted is greater generally than during winter.
And given that two years demonstrate similar behavior we can probably make a good assumption that this
is going to continue going forward.
So these were a couple of examples of the recognizing pattern behind your data set this step number
five is to look for dependencies in order to further enhance your model if in case of the cars painted
we can think of.
What are the main inputs into the system to get cars painted and assuming manual labor and manual painting
in the workshop.
The number of cross painted would probably depend on the number of safeties that work on the day number
of full time equivalent employees and their productivity individual productivity.
Multiplying one by another we'll get number of cars painted on that specific day.
And let's assume that our previous our data set looks like this.
So there was a bit of a step change.
As you can see and if you were to dig down into the data and check on the full time schedule and then
police working on a day and doing that month or you would see that on the 16th of April number of fifty's
dropped by two people could have taken their annual leave or they called in sick or whatnot.
And therefore the output of the workshop dropped.
So assuming similar productivity day and day probably good for I a little bit.
But you can buy it by digging into the details.
You can enhance the understanding of the past performance and we'll be able to make better predictions
going forward.
So these were the five steps how to derive a good baseline and to recap first step is to plot your daughter.
Second step is to exclude or eliminate your outliers and reduce noise where possible.
Step number three is to develop average and the understand the variability of your data in order to
understand the sensitivities the accuracy of them or potential accuracy of the model and what not.
Step Number four was to look for any patterns in the behavior of your daughter whether it's seasonality
or step change any other cycle behavior or the having an incline and growth in your model in your dorm
and stubborn.
Step Number five is deconstructing your output and trying to get more details by looking at the next
level of details behind the data.
So these were the five steps of baselining forecasting being the logical next step.
Here's a few approaches that has a few approaches and I took Wikipedia as the source of the list of
those approaches.
And because I found it as probably the most comprehensive out there I will quickly run through them.
I'm not going to go into a lot of details because you can jump on Wikipedia and check it out yourself
but I'll give the definition.
The way I understand it hopefully will help you in reading that material going forward.
So first forecasting method is called versus quantitative.
In the absence of data in order to build a baseline Sometimes you have to operate with 3:45 and the
data could be collected collected through service of your customers through the service of your suppliers
and whatnot.
And based on understanding of the expert customer or
opinions you can predict and put the forecast forward.
Step number two is the leverage approach.
It is a very simple approach where all future values are equal to the average or mean of past performance.
As you can imagine it is a very simple simple approach.
And the forecast could be sometimes oversimplified especially if there is a behavior or pattern like
seasonality or step change your average could not be as accurate of a prediction approach.
Number three is what is called a naive approach.
It's very simple to understand.
You take the very last point you have and make all future value is equal to that.
So if.
Let me give you an example from everyday life.
If you've had a few drunk three liters of water on on today by the end of the day the forecast would
suggest that going forward until the end of the week you'll keep drinking three leaders a day regardless
of how many years you drink yesterday or the day before.
So taking the last data point and projecting it forward forecasting method number four is drift method
drift method is a particular application of your naive approach.
But instead of projecting forward all the same data point you want to project the trend and to do that
the drift method suggests that you need to take the first point in the data set.
And the last point in you that I said connect them one with one straight line and continue that line
in the future.
So if on Monday you drank one liter of water on Tuesday you drank two liters of water.
And these are the only two data points you have in your data set.
You can suggest that on Wednesday they'll do three leaders on those day 48 hours and so on and so forth
so using the slope and the last data point in order to for agast forward the approach Number five is
seasonal Knabe approach.
We've talked about seasonality a little bit in baselining.
So I'm not going to repeat myself.
But this approach takes the very last data point you have as per Knabe approach and uses the seasonality
pattern as of that point time series methods.
So there are several of them.
Most commonly used in the business world are the rolling average and weighted drawing average these
methods are good because they are good and quite practical because you include more than one or two
data points.
You include some history in like in the past performance in order to make prediction prediction for
the future.
However it is still sometimes can be simplified especially in case you have some pedant's in the data.
Approach number 7 which is casual or econometric forecasting method this approach is very similar to
the one we discussed in the baselining where we deconstructed our performance into a number of employees
and their productivity of of the employees.
So casual and kind of metric or econometric method actually tries to look behind the KPI into underlying
factors and to give you another example this could be temperature as the factor of electricity consumption
in the building used for air conditioning.
So if the outside temperature is rising the consumption is likely to increase.
So there are some dependencies that are being looked at in order to do the forecast.
The method number eight is judgemental method and it is pretty cool method and worth exploring and probably
deserves a separate conversation.
This method is used sometimes when there is a severe lack of Dardenne or lack of data overall in order
to make a prediction and this method is reliant on expert opinion or some assumptions.
This could be.
There are several frameworks that could be used here.
One of them is
a framework that the belief framework.
If people believe in something happening with sudden probability then it has good chances in order to
be implemented and therefore good enough prediction and forecasting in some cases.
So this method is very useful like the kind of like believe in quote marks framework especially when
you have a lot of stakeholders around the table that you want to interview ask step or the approach.
Number nine is artificial intelligence intelligence methods.
There are several of them that are included there.
But I'll give you an example of one.
Neural networks is one of the forecasting methods where you train your neural network in order to give
you a model that will predict the future performance.
And so the method number 10 is a variety of other methods.
As an example one of them could be simulations and for example to give you a specific product any logic
as simulation software can potentially make predictions based on different models built into it of the
future performance.
So forecasting methods are not limited to having a solid data set behind it.
But the baseline baselining usually requires the data set.
Otherwise there is not much to baseline with and but as you can see the techniques and the the approach
that you use in both baselining and forecasting a bit of an overlap.
So this is it for this lecture.
I hope this gives you a little bit of a better understanding how to understand your data from the business
point of view from non hard scientific statistical point of view by just looking at it plotting it seeing
some dependencies excluding data points that noise and outliers and predicting the future performance.
Plus Additionally we looked at some of the forecasting methods that go beyond using baseline and the
historical data set.
Hopefully that was useful and I hope to see you in one of the next tutorials.
And until then enjoy the course.